added multi attach tutorial (#150)
syseleven/grav-docs-metakube: pages/04.tutorials/30.use-multi-attach-volumes/default.en.md

---
title: 'How to use multi attach volumes'
published: true
date: '17-12-2020 15:00'
taxonomy:
    tag:
        - metakube
        - cluster
        - rwx
        - storage
        - volumes
        - multi attach
---

## Using Multi Attach Volumes (Read Write Many)

To use multi attach volumes or read write many volumes you need to use a specific storage class in your metakube cluster. We currently offer two preinstalled storage classes.

``` bash
kubectl get sc
NAME                      PROVISIONER                RECLAIMPOLICY   VOLUMEBINDINGMODE
sys11-quobyte (default)   cinder.csi.openstack.org   Delete          WaitForFirstConsumer
sys11-quobyte-multi       cinder.csi.openstack.org   Delete          Immediate
```

> The default storage class provides regular block storage that can only be attached to a single worker node. The storage class sys11-quobyte-multi privides a multi attach storage class. You may use volumes created with this storage class to attach to multiple worker nodes and pods. Please do not use this storage class as a substitute for a replicated cluster. The volumes created with this storage class use a regular ext4 file system. They do not support I/O fencing. I/O fencing protocols control write access in a shared storage environment to maintain data consistency. Your applications must provide write ordering for the attached instances to maintain data consistency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default storage class provides regular block storage that can only be attached to a single worker node. The storage class sys11-quobyte-multi provides a multi attach storage class. You may use volumes created with this storage class to attach to multiple worker nodes and pods. Please do not use this storage class as a substitute for a replicated cluster. The volumes created with this storage class use a regular ext4 file system. They do not support I/O fencing. I/O fencing protocols control write access in a shared storage environment to maintain data consistency. Your applications must provide write ordering for the attached instances to maintain data consistency.
```

> One of the current limitations of using multi attch volumes are the file system permissions. The volumes are create and bound as the root user. Which causes problems running non root containers. As you will not be able to read or write any files on the volumes. This small problem can be solved with an init container. To do this you must insure that your init container can access your volumes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the current limitations of using multi attach volumes are the file system permissions. The volumes are created and bound as the root user, which causes problems running non root containers as you will not be able to read or write any files on the volumes. This small problem can be solved with an init container. To do this you must ensure that your init container can access your volumes:
```
